yes i will be and the pressure i think
is on al gore's several the commentators
have said earlier because the big puzzle
in this election is that he ought to be
winning in a landslide i mean things
people think the economy is great
they're optimistic about the future the
president has a high job rating they're
satisfied with the way things are going
in the country and yet this election is
very tight it shows you that gore really
hasn't sold the message that he needs to
sell which is thing times are good why
would you want to change do you really
want to change the direction the country
is going people want a change of
leadership not a change of direction and
i think we're going to see gore trying
to sell that message tonight jeff
greenfield a very different format
tonight real voters are there in the
room although their questions were
screened this afternoon jim lehrer has
picked out which ones he wants to ask
right and this this does put a different
kind of pressure on the candidates
because they are responding not to a
journalist who they can feel free to
override but the people who they at
least ostensibly have to talk to it's
also judy a very different climate than
two weeks ago the middle east violence
the explosion of the uss cole the market
jitters those numbers we run on the
lower left-hand corner with 50 of
americans invested in the stock market
in one way or another the jitters of
these financial markets i think have put
the country in a slightly less buoyant
mood than would have been the case two
weeks ago and that's one thing i think
both of these candidates are gonna have
to deal with and one other thing which
is the death of the governor of that
state these are voters in missouri and
they're of course going to be very
shocked by the news and still operating
under a great deal of sadness because of
the death of their governor in fact
we've been told that there will be a
moment of silence they're asked by jim
for by jim lehrer the moderator when the
debate gets underway and we presume both
governor bush and vice president gore
will have a comment to make of their own
when when the debate does get underway
all right and jim lehrer
just announced to this audience
assembled that seconds are approaching
the start of it
let's listen
good evening from the fieldhouse at
washington university in st louis i'm
jim lehrer of the newshour on pbs and i
welcome you to this third and final
campaign 2000 debate between the
democratic candidate for president vice
president al gore and the republican
candidate governor george w bush of
texas let's welcome the candidates now
before proceeding tonight we would like
to observe a moment of silence in memory
of governor mel carnahan of missouri who
along with his son and his former chief
of staff died in a private plane crash
last night near st louis
a reminder as we continue now that these
debates are sponsored by the commission
on presidential debates the format's and
the rules were worked out by the
commission and the two campaigns
tonight's questions will be asked by st
louis area voters who were identified as
being uncommitted by the gallup
organization earlier today each of them
wrote a question on a small card like
this those cards were collected and then
given to me this afternoon my job under
the rules of the evening was to decide
the order the questions will be asked
and to call on the questioners
accordingly i also have the option of
asking follow-ups which in order to get
to more of the panel's questions for the
record i plan to do sparingly and mostly
for clarifications the audience
participants are bound by the following
rule they shall not ask follow-up
questions or otherwise participate in
the extended discussion and the
questioners microphone will be turned
off after he or she completes asking the
question those are the rules as in
winston-salem last last week no single
answer or response from a candidate can
exceed two minutes there is an audience
here in the hall and they have promised
to remain absolutely quiet as did their
predecessors this year in boston
danville and winston-salem before we
begin a correction from last week's
debate i was wrong and i said vice
president gore's campaign commercials
said called governor bush a bumbler
that specific charge was made in a press
statement by gork mark fabiani not in a
tv guide now let's go to the first
question of over the 130 questions we
received from this panel we will begin
with one of the 19 on health issues and
it goes to you mr vice president and it
will be asked by james anka's
mr hankins
how do you feel about hmos and insurance
companies making the critical decisions
that affect people's lives instead of
the medical professionals and why are
the hmos and insurance companies not
held accountable for for their decisions
mr hankins i don't feel good about it
and i think we ought to have a patient's
bill of rights to take the medical
decisions away from the hmos and give
them back to the doctors and the nurses
i want to come back and and tell you why
but if you will forgive me i would like
to say something right now at the
beginning of this debate following on
the moment of silence for mel carnahan
and randy carnahan and chris safford
tipper and i were good friends with mel
and randy and i know that all of us here
want to extend our sympathy and
condolences to gene and the family and
to the sifford family and i'd just like
to say that this debate in a way is a
living tribute to mel carnahan because
he loved the vigorous discussion of
ideas in our democracy he was a
fantastic governor of missouri this
state became one of the top five in the
nation for health care coverage for
children under his leadership one of the
best in advancing all kinds of benefits
for children to grow up healthy and
strong and of course this debate also
takes place at a time when the tragedy
of the uss cole is on our minds and
hearts and insofar as the memorial
services tomorrow i would like to also
extend sympathy to the families of those
who have died and those who are still
and and the injured now mr hankins i
think that the the situation that you
described has gotten completely out of
doctors are are giving prescriptions
they're recommending treatments and then
there their recommendations are being
overruled by hmos and insurance
companies that is unacceptable i support
a strong national patients bill of
rights it is actually a disagreement
between us the national law
that is pending on this the dingle
norwood bill a bipartisan bill is one is
that a port and that the governor does
not two minutes response governor bush i
too want to extend my prayers to that
and blessings god's blessings on the
families whose lives were overturned
yesterday today last night it was a
tragic moment actually mr vice
president's not true i i do support a
national patients bill of rights as a
matter of fact i brought republicans and
democrats together to do just that in
the state of texas to get a patient's
bill of rights through it requires a
different kind of leadership style to do
it though you see in order to get
something done on behalf of the people
you have to put partisanship aside and
that's what we did in my state we've got
one of the most advanced patients bill
of rights it says for example that a
woman can doesn't have to go through a
gatekeeper to go to a gynecologist it
says that you can't gag a doctor doctor
can advise you the html oh the insurance
company can't gag that doctor from
giving you full advice in this
particular bill it allows patients to
choose a doctor their own doctor if they
want to but we did something else that
was interesting we're one of the first
states that said you can sue an hmo for
denying you proper covers now there's
what's called an independent review
organization that you have to go through
first it says if you got a complaint
with your insurance company you can take
your complaint to an objective body if
the objective body rules on your behalf
the insurance company must follow those
rules however if the if the insurance
company doesn't follow the findings of
the iro then that becomes a cause of
action in the court of law it's time for
our nation to come together and do
what's right for the people and i think
this is right for the people you know i
support a national patients bill of
rights mr vice president and i
i want all people covered i don't want
the law to supersede good law like we
got in texas governor i think jim we
have a direct agreement all just just a
minute mr president i wanted to you
know the way the rules go here now two
minutes two minutes and then i'll decide
whether we go on okay so what i want to
make sure is we understand here is
before we go on to another question in
the health area would you agree that
they do to agree on a national patients
bill of rights absolutely absolutely not
i referred to the dingell norwood bill
it is the bipartisan bill that is now
pending in the congress the the hmos and
the insurance companies support the
other bill that's pending the one that
the republican majority has put forward
they like it because it doesn't
accomplish what i think really needs to
be accomplished to give the decisions
back to the doctors and nurses and to
give you a right of appeal to somebody
other than the hmo or insurance company
let you go to the nearest emergency room
without having to call an hmo before you
call nine-one-one to let you see a
specialist a specialist if you need to
and it has strong bipartisan support it
is being blocked by the republican
leadership so in the congress and i
specifically would like to know whether
governor bush will support the dingell
norwood bill which is the main one
pending governor bush you may answer
that if you'd like but also i'd like how
you see the differences between the two
of you and we need to move on well the
difference is is that i can get it done
that i can get something positive done
on behalf of the people that's what the
question in this campaign is about it's
not only what's your philosophy and
what's your position on issues but can
you get things done
and i believe i can alright what about
the devil norwood bill alright we're
gonna go now not quite let me fall right
yes i talked about the principles and
the issues that i think are important in
a patient's bill of rights you know
there's this kind of washington dc focus
well it's in this committee or it's got
this sponsor if i'm the president we're
gonna have emergency room care
we have gag orders when we'll have
direct access to ob/gyn people be able
to take their hmo insurance company to
court that's what i've done in texas and
that's the kind of leadership style i'll
bring to washington alright another the
next question also on on health issue is
from it will be asked by murray payne
clay p and it goes to governor bush
are either of you concerned with there
you go are either of you concerned with
finding some feasible way to lower the
price of pharmaceutical drugs such as
education on minimizing intake revamp of
the fda process or streamlining the drug
company's procedures instead of just
finding more money to pay for them well
that's a great question i i think one of
the problems we have particularly for
seniors is there's no prescription drug
coverage in medicare and therefore when
they have to try to purchase drugs they
do so on their own there's no kind of
collective bargaining there's no power
of purchasing amongst seniors so i think
step one to make sure prescription drugs
is more affordable for seniors and those
are the folks really rely upon
prescription drugs a lot these days is
to reform the medicare system is to have
prescription drugs as an integral part
of medicare once and for all the problem
we have today is that like the patient's
bill of rights particularly health care
there's a lot of bickering in washington
dc it's kind of like a political issue
as opposed to a people issue so what i
want to do is i want to call upon
republicans and democrats to forget all
the arguing and finger-pointing and come
together and take care of our seniors
with the prescription drug program that
says we'll pay for the poor seniors will
help all seniors with prescription drugs
in the meantime i think it's important
to have what's called immediate helping
hand which is direct money to states so
that seniors poor seniors don't have to
choose between food and medicine that's
that's a part of an overall overhaul but
purchasing power is important i'm
against price controls
i think price controls would hurt our
ability to continue important research
and development drug therapies are
replacing a lot of medicines as as we
used to know it one of the most
important things is to continue the
research and development component and
and so i'm against price controls
expediting drugs through the fda makes
sense of course allowing the new bill
that was passed in the congress made
sense to allow for you know drugs that
were sold overseas to come back in other
countries to come back into the united
states that makes sense but the best
thing to do is to reform medicare vice
president gore two minutes all right
here we go again now look if you want
someone who will spend a lot of words
describing a whole convoluted process
and then end up supporting legislation
that is supported by the big drug
companies this is your man if you want
someone who will fight for you and who
will fight for the middle class families
and working men and women who are sick
and tired of having their parents and
grandparents pay higher prices for
prescription drugs than anybody else
then i want to fight from you and you
ask the a great question because it's
not only seniors listen for 24 years i
have never been afraid to take on the
big drug companies they do some great
things they discovered great new cures
and that's great we want it we want them
to continue that but they are now
spending more money on advertising and
promotion you see all these ads then
they are on research and development and
they're trying to artificially extend
the monopoly patent protection so they
can keep charging these very high prices
i want to streamline the approval of the
competing generic drugs and the new
kinds of treatments that can compete
with them so that we drink bring the
price down for everybody now briefly let
me tell you how my prescription drug
plan works the governor talked about
medicare i get i propose a real
prescription drug benefit under medicare
for all seniors all seniors and here's
how it works you pick your own doctor
and nobody can take that away from you
the doctor chooses the prescription that
you need and nobody can overrule your
doctor you go to your own pharmacy and
then medicare pays half the price if
you're poor they pay all of it if you
have extraordin
high cost then they pay all over 4,000
out of pocket and i'll bring new
competition to bring the price down and
if you pass the big drug companies bill
nothing will happen
all right another health question it
comes from vicki french and it's for you
vice president gore vicki french where
are you oh there's yes in texas would
you be open to the idea of a national
health care plan for everybody and if
not why if so is this something you
would try to implement if you're elected
into office and what would you do to
implement this plan i think that we
should move step by step toward universe
universal health coverage but i am not
in favor of government doing it all
we've spent 65 years now on the
development of a hybrid system partly
private partly public and 85 of our
people have health insurance 15 don't
that adds up to 44 million people that
is a national outrage we have got to get
health coverage for those who do not
have it and we've got to improve the
quality for those who do with a
patient's bill of rights that's real and
that works the dingell norwood bill and
we have got to fill in the gaps in
coverage by finally bringing parity for
the treatment of mental illness because
that's been left out we've got to deal
with long-term care now here are the
steps that i would take first of all i
will make a commitment to bring health
care coverage of high quality that is
affordable to every single child in
america within four years and then we'll
fill other gaps by covering the the the
parents of those children when the
family is poor or up to two and a half
times the poverty rate i want to give a
tax credit for the purchase of
individual health insurance plans i want
to give small business employers a tax
credit 25 percent to encourage the the
providing of health insurance for the
employees in small businesses i want to
give seniors who are well the near
elderly i don't like that term because
i'm just about in that cat
but those 55 to 65 ought to be able to
buy into medicare for premiums that are
reasonable and fair and significantly
below what they have to to get now now
we have a big we have a big difference
on this and you need to know the record
here under governor bush texas has sunk
to be 50th out of 50 in health care and
health insurance for their citizens last
week he said that they were spending 3.7
billion dollars or 4.7 billion dollars
on this mr president ok mom is up
governor bush two minutes i'm absolutely
opposed to a national health care plan i
don't want the federal government making
decisions for consumers or for providers
i what what the administration tried to
do in 1993 they tried to have a national
health care plan and fortunately it
failed i trust people i don't trust the
federal government's gonna be one of the
themes you hear tonight i don't want the
federal government making decisions on
behalf of everybody there is an issue
with the uninsured assure is and we've
got uninsured people in my state ours is
the big state fast growing state we
share a common border with another
nation but we're providing health care
for our people it's one thing about
that's a washington term question is are
people getting health care and we've got
a strong safety net and there needs to
be a safety net in america there needs
to be more community health clinics for
the poor can go get health care we need
a program for the uninsured they've been
talking about it in washington dc the
number of uninsured have now gone up for
the past 7 years we need we need a
2,000 credit rebate for people working
people who don't have insurance they can
get in the marketplace and start
purchasing insurance we need to have
allow small businesses to write across
insurance across jurisdictional lines so
small businesses can afford health care
small restaurants can afford health care
and so health care needs to be
available well we got to trust people to
make decision with their lives and the
medicare reform i talked about it says
if you're a senior you can stay in
medicare if you like it and that's fine
but we're gonna give you other choices
to choose if you want to do so just like
they do the federal employees the people
who work in washington dc for the us
congress of the united states senate get
a variety of choices to make in their
lives and that's what we ought to do for
that all people in america yes sir
governor to follow up not paying
attention oh no right now no right now
education we're gonna find my light
these folks submitted 18 18 questions on
on education and the first one is that
there would be that we will be asked on
education will go to you governor and
we'll be asked by angie pedak angie
pedak where are you there if there she
is governor right there thanks hi angie
i've heard a lot about education and the
need to hold teachers in schools
accountable and i certainly agree with
that but as an individual with an
educational background and also a parent
i have seen a lot of instances where the
parents are unresponsive to the teachers
or flat-out uninvolved in their child's
education how do you intend to not only
hold the teachers and schools
accountable but also hold parents
accountable well you know it's hard to
make people love one another i wish i
knew the law cuz that darn sure sign it
i wish i knew the law and said all of us
would be good parents one of the things
the next president must do is to remind
people that if we're gonna have a
responsible period in america that each
of us must love our children with all
our heart and all our soul i happen to
believe strong accountability encourages
parental involvement though i think when
you measure and post results on the
internet or in the town newspapers most
parents say wait a minute my child's
school isn't doing what i wanted to do
and therefore become involved in
education i recognize there are some who
just don't seem to care
but there are a lot of parents who feel
like everything is going well in their
child's school and all of a sudden they
wake up and realize that wait a minute
standards aren't being met that's why
i'm so strong for accountability i
believe we ought to measure a lot three
four five six seven eighth grade we do
so in my state of texas one of the good
things we've done in texas is we've got
strong accountability because you can't
cure unless you know you can't you can't
solve a problem unless you diagnose it i
strongly believe that one of the best
things to encourage parental involvement
also as to know that the classrooms will
be safe and secure
that's why i support a teacher liability
act at the federal level that says that
the teacher or principal upholds
reasonable standards of classroom
discipline they can't be sued they can't
be sued i think parents will be more
involved with education when they know
their children's classrooms are safe and
secure as well i also believe that we
need to say to people that if you cannot
meet standards there has to be a
consequence instead of just the kind of
the soft bigotry of low expectations
that there has to be a consequence we
can't continue to shuffle children
through school and one of the
consequences and allow parents they have
different choices vice president gore
you know we have a huge difference
between us on this question i'd like to
start by telling you what my vision is i
see a day in the united states of
america where all of our public schools
are considered excellent world class
where there are no failing schools where
the classrooms are small enough in size
number of students so that the teacher
can spend enough one-on-one time with
each with each student now that means
recruiting new teachers for the public
schools it means in my plan hiring
bonuses to get a hundred thousand new
teachers in the public schools within
the next four years it means also
helping local school districts that
sometimes find the parents of
school-aged children
outvoted on bond issues too
them some help with interest-free
bonding authority so that we can build
new schools and modernize the classrooms
we need to give teachers the training
and professional development that they
need to including the paid time off to
go visit the classroom of a master
teacher and they pick up some new skills
i want to give every middle-class family
a 10,000 a year tax deduction for
college tuition so that so that
middle-class families will always be
able to send their kids on to college i
want to work for a universal preschool
because we know from all the studies
that the the the the youngsters learned
kids learn more in the first few years
of life than anywhere else now i said
there was a contrast governor bush is
for vouchers and in his plan he proposes
to drain more money more taxpayer money
out of the public schools for private
school vouchers than all of the money
that he proposes in his entire budget
for public schools themselves and only
one in twenty students would be eligible
for these vouchers and they wouldn't
even pay the full tuition to private
school i think that's a mistake i don't
think we should give up on the private
schools and leave kids trapped in
failing schools i think we i think we
should make it the number one priority
to make our schools the best in the
world all of them governor what is your
position on this i appreciate that i
think anytime we end with one of these
attacks it's it's appropriate to respond
here's what i think
first of all vouchers are up to states
if you want to do a voucher program of
zeref i see i strongly believe in local
control of schools i'm a governor of the
state and i don't like it when the
federal government tells us what to do
i believe in local control of schools
but here's what i've said i've said to
the extent we spend federal money on
disadvantaged children we want the
schools to show us whether or not the
children are learning what's
unreasonable about that we expect there
to be standards met and we expect there
to be measurement and if we find success
will praise it but when we find children
trapped in schools that will not change
and will not teach instead of saying oh
this is okay in america just a shuffle
poor kids through schools there has to
be a consequence and the consequence is
federal portion of federal money will go
to the parent so the parent can go to a
tutoring program or another public
school or another private or private
school you see there has to be a
consequence we've got a society that
says hey the status quo was fine just
move them through well guess who suffers
but if the hartmann about what's the
other side on that well the the program
that he's proposing is not the one that
he just described under your plan
governor bush states would be required
to pay vouchers to students to match the
the vouchers so that the federal
government would put up now here's an it
the way it would happen is that under
his plan if a school was designated as
failing the kids would be trapped there
for another three years and then some of
them would get federal vouchers and the
state would be forced to to match those
that money under my plan if a school is
failing we work with the states to give
them the authority and the resources to
close down that school and reopen it
right away with a new principal a new
faculty a turnaround team of specialists
who know what they're doing it's based
on the plan of governors jim hunt in
north carolina and it works great so no
vouchers under a gordon if i thought
that there was no alternative then i
might feel differently but i have an
obligation to fight to make sure there
are no failing schools we've got a
turnaround all most schools are
excellent but we've got to make sure
that all of them are andrew cosford has
a related question on education that's
right on this subject mr casper worry
there you are and it's for vice
president gore mr vice president in the
school district in which i work and in
countless others across the nation we
face crumbling school buildings
increased school violence student apathy
overcrowding lack of funding lawsuits
the list goes on
i could mention low teacher pay but i
won't what can you tell me and my fellow
american teachers today about your plans
for our immediate future what grade do
you teach up up
that's violation of your rule high
i mentioned before that that the local
communities are having a harder time
passing bond issues traditionally if
you've been involved in a campaign like
that you know that the parents with kids
in school the ones that turn out and
vote it's ironic that there are now
there's now a smaller percentage of the
voters made up of parents with children
than ever in american history because of
the aging of our population but at the
same time we've got the largest
generation of students in public schools
therefore more than 90 of america's
children go to public schools and the
it's the largest number ever this year
and they'll break the record next year
and every year for ten years running
we've got to do something about this and
local it's not enough to leave it up to
the local school districts they're not
able to do it and our future depends
upon it look we're in an information age
our economic future depends upon whether
or not our children are going to get the
kind of education that lets them go on
to college and again i want to make it
possible for all middle-class families
to send their kids to college and more
pell grants for those who are in the
lower-income groups also and then i want
to make sure that we have job training
on top of that and lifelong learning but
it all starts with the public school
teachers my proposal gives 10,000
hiring bonuses for those teachers who
are who get certified to teach in the
areas where they're most needed
now accountability we basically agree on
accountability my plan requires testing
of all students it also requires
something that governor bush's plan
doesn't it requires testing of all new
teachers including in the subjects that
they teach we have to start treating
teachers like the professionals that
they are and give them the respect and
and the kind of quality of life that
will draw more people into teaching
because we need a lot more teachers
governor bush two minutes
when you total up all the federal
spending he wants to do
it's the largest increase in federal
spending in years and there's not gonna
be enough money i have been a governor
of a big state i've made education my
number one priority
that's the fuck that's that's what
governors ought to do they ought to say
this is the most important thing we do
as a state the federal government puts
about six percent of money up they put
about you know 60 of the strings where
you got to fill out paperwork i don't
know if you have to be a paperwork
filler outter but most of its because in
the federal government what i want to do
is to send flexibility and authority to
the local folks so you can choose what
to do with the money one size does not
fit all i'd worry about federalizing
education if i were you i believe
strongly that the federal government can
help i need to fund headstart we need to
have accountability the vice president's
plan does not have annual accountability
third grade fourth grade fifth grade we
need to demand on results i believe
strongly in a patient and a teacher
protection act like i mentioned i hear
from teachers all the time about the
lawsuits and the threats respect in the
classroom part of us because you can't
you can't control the classroom you
can't have a consequence for somebody
without fear of getting sued under
federal law so i'm gonna ask the
congress to pass a teacher protection
act so i believe in flexibility i
believe in a national reading initiative
for local districts to access with k
through 2 diagnostic testing curriculum
that works phonics works by the way it
needs to be a part of our curriculum
there needs to be flexibility for
teacher training and teacher hiring with
federal money now the federal government
can be a b apart but but don't fall prey
to all this stuff about money here and
money there because education is really
fun at the local level 94 percent comes
from the local level vice president gore
is the governor right when he says that
you're proposing the largest federal
spending in years absol
lutely not absolutely not i'm so glad
that i have a chance to knock that down
look the problem is that under governor
bush's plan 1.6 trillion dollar tax cut
mostly to the wealthy under his own
budget numbers he proposes spending more
money for a tax cut just for the
wealthiest 1 than all of the new money
that he budgets for education health
care and national defense combined now
under my plan we will balance the budget
every year i'm not just saying this i'm
not just talking i have helped to
balance the budget for the first time in
30 years pay down the debt and under my
plan in four years as a percentage of
our gross domestic product federal
spending will be the smallest that it
has been in 50 years one reason is you
know the third biggest spending item in
our budget is interest on the national
debt we get nothing for it we keep the
good faith and credit of the united
i will pay down the debt every single
year until it is eliminated early in the
next decade that gets rid of the the
third biggest intrusion of the federal
government in in our economy now because
the governor has all this money for a
tax cut mostly to the wealthy there is
no money left over so so schools get
testing and in a lawsuit reform and and
not much else
governor the vice president says you're
wrong well he's wrong just add up all
the numbers it's three times bigger than
what president clinton proposed the
senate budget committee time excuse me
three times bigger than what president
cuts it on that jim that was not
doubting about the journalists who
analyzed the ads that wasn't misleading
my turn yes
forget the journalists he proposed more
than walter mondale and michael dukakis
combined this is a big spender yes and
you ought to be proud of it as part of
his record we just have a different
philosophy let me talk about tax relief
if you pay taxes you ought to get tax
relief the vice president believes that
only the right people ought to get tax
relief i don't think that's the role of
the president to pick you're right and
you're not right i think if you're gonna
have tax relief everybody ought to get
it and therefore wealthy people are
gonna get it but the top 1 will end up
paying one third of the taxes in america
and they get one fifth of the benefits
and that's because we structured the
plan so that six million additional
american families pay no taxes if you're
a family of four making 50,000 in
missouri you get a 50 cut in your
federal income taxes what i've done is
set priorities and funded and there's
extra money and i believe the people who
paid the bills already ought to get some
money back it's a difference of opinion
he wants to grow the government and i
trust you with your own money well i
wish we could spend an hour talking
about trusting people get this the right
position to take can we come in at time
you know hold on one sec here though but
the governor just to reverse the thing
what do you say specifically to what the
vice president said tonight he said it
many many times it's your tax cut
benefits the top 1 of the wealthiest
americans and you've heard what it does
if you pay taxes you're gonna get a
benefit people who pay taxes all right
then we'll get tax relief why shouldn't
they well alright let me finish please
well under my plan if you make at the
top that the wealthy people pay 62
percent of the taxes today afterwards
they pay 64 percent this is a fair plan
you know why because the tax code is
unfair for people at the bottom end of
the economic ladder if you're a single
mother making 22,000 a year today and
you're trying to raise two children and
for every additional dollar you earn you
pay a higher marginal rate on that
dollar and there's someone making
200,000 and it's not right if i want to
do something about that
vice-presidents or look this isn't about
governor bush it's not about me it is
about you and i want to come back to
something i said before if you want
somebody who believes that we were
better off eight years ago than we are
now and that we ought to go back to the
kind of policies that we had back then
emphasizing tax cuts mainly for the
wealthy here is your man if you want
somebody who will fight for you
and who will fight to have middle-class
tax cuts then i am your man i want to be
now yeah i doubt anybody here makes more
than three hundred and thirty thousand
dollars a year i won't ask you but if
you do you're in the top 1 it would be
a violation of the rules they come i'm
not gonna ask i'm not going to ask but
if everyone here in this audience was
was dead on in the middle of the middle
class then the tax cuts for every single
one of you all added up would be less
then the tax cut his plan would give to
just one member of that top wealthiest
1 now you judge for yourselves whether
or not that's fair but quick and then
we're moving on good fifty million
americans get no tax relief under his
plan that's not wrong you may not be one
of you're just not one of the right
people and secondly we've had enough
fighting it's time to unite you talked
about eight years and eight years they
haven't gotten anything done on medicare
on social security a patient's bill of
rights all right it's time to get
something done hey that jim medicare
week i i cast the tie-breaking vote to
add 26 years to the life of medicare it
was due to go bankrupt in 1999 and that
50 million figure again the newspapers i
said you you said forget the journalists
but they are the the keepers of the
scorecard and whether or not you're
using facts that aren't right and that
that fact is just not right
speaking of keepers of the scorecard
that's what i'm trying to do here mr
vice president bush we're gonna we're
gonna move on we're gonna have to move
on all right there were 12 questions on
foreign and military
matters and the first one that we're
going to ask will be directed to you
governor bush and david norwood is going
to ask it mr norwood where are you
there you are
what would you make what would make you
the best candidate in office during the
middle east crisis i've been a leader
and a person has to set a clear vision
and convince people to follow i i got a
strategy for the middle east and first
let me say that our nation now needs to
speak with one voice during this time
and i applaud the president for working
hard to defuse tensions our nation needs
to be credible and strong when we say
we're somebody's friend everybody's got
to believe it
israel's our friend and we'll stand by
israel we need to reach out to moderate
arab nations as well to build coalitions
to keep the peace
i i also need to the next leader needs
to be patient we can't put the middle
east peace process on our timetable it's
got to be on the timetable of the of the
people that are trying to that we're
trying to bring to the peace table we
can't dictate the terms of peace which
means that you have to be steady i can't
worry about polls or focus groups you've
got to have a clear vision that's what a
leader does leader also understands that
the united states it must be strong to
keep the peace saddam hussein still is a
threat in the middle east our coalition
against saddam is unraveling the
sanctions are loosened i the man who may
be developing weapons of mass
destruction we don't know because
inspectors aren't in so advanced your
question requires a clear vision
willingness to stand by our friends and
the credibility for people both friend
and foe to understand what america says
something we mean it
nice president gar i see a future when
the world is at peace with the united
states of america promoting the values
of democracy and human rights and
freedom all around the world even in
iran they have had an election that
began to bring about some change we
stand for those values and we have to be
willing to assert them right now our
military is the strongest in the entire
history of the world i will i pledge to
you i will do whatever is necessary to
make sure that it stays that way now
what can i bring to that challenge when
i was a young man my father was a
senator opposed to the vietnam war when
i graduated from college there there
were plenty of fancy ways to get out of
going and being a part of that i went
and i volunteered and i went to vietnam
i didn't do the most or run the greatest
risk by a longshot but i learned what it
was like to be an enlisted man in the
united states army in the congress in
the house of representatives i served on
the house intelligence committee and i
worked hard to to learn the subject of
nuclear arms control and how we can
defuse these tensions and deal with
non-proliferation and deal with the
problems of terrorism and these new
weapons of mass destruction look we're
gonna face some serious new challenges
in the next four years i've worked on
that long and hard when i went to the
united states senate i asked for an
assignment to the armed services
committee and while i was there i worked
on a bipartisan basis as i did in the
house i worked with former president
reagan on the modernisation of our
strategic weaponry in the in the senate
i was one of only 10 democrats along
with senator joe lieberman to support
governor bush's dad in the persian gulf
war resolution and for the last eight
years i've served on
security council could i say just one
other thing here no sir
we'll get back with it i'm gonna hear
the next question is to you and i'm not
wait it's a related it's a related
question it's going to be asked by
kenneth allen allen i think that he he
gets a oh i'm sorry you're right go
ahead mr allen right there today our
military forces are stretched thinner
and doing more than they've ever done
before during peacetime i'd like to know
what you i think we'd all like to know
what you have as president would do to
ensure proper resourcing for the current
mission and or more selectively choosing
the time and place that our forces will
be used around the world thank you sir
just to finish briefly i started to say
that for the last eight years i've been
on the national security council and
last week i broke up a suspended
campaigning for for for two days or
parts of two days to go back and
participate in the meetings that charted
the president's summit meeting that he
just returned from earlier today and our
team of our country's team over there
did a did a great job it's a difficult
situation the united states has to be
strong in order to to make sure that we
can help promote peace and security and
stability and that means keeping our
military strong now i said earlier that
we are the strongest military but we
need to to continue improving readiness
and making sure that our military
personnel are adequately paid and that
the combination of their pay and their
benefits and their retirement as
veterans is is comparable to the stiff
competition that's coming in this strong
economy from the from the private sector
and we i have supported the largest pay
raise in many a year and i support
another one now i also support
modernization of our strategic and
tactical weaponry the governor's
proposed skipping a generation of
technology i think that's i think that
would be a mistake because i think one
of the ways we've been able to be so
successful in kosovo and bosnia and
haiti and in other places is by having
the technological edge
you know we won that conflict in kosovo
without losing a single human life in in
combat a single american life in combat
now readiness the trends before we
before i got my current job were on the
decline the number of divisions were
reduced i argued that we should reverse
that trend and take it back up and i'm
happy to tell you that we have now in my
budget for the next for the next ten
years i proposed a hundred billion
dollars for this purpose the governor
proposes 45 billion i proposed more than
twice as much because i think it's
needed governor bush two minutes since
we're spending contest i'd come in
second i rarely admit i i'm not gonna
grow the size of the federal government
like he is here's your question was
deployment it must be in the national
interests must be in our vital interests
whether we ever send troops the mission
must be clear soldiers must understand
why are we going the force must be
strong enough so that the mission can be
accomplished and the exit strategy needs
to be well defined
i'm concerned that we're over deployed
around the world see i think the mission
has somewhat become fuzzy should i be
fortunate enough during your confidence
the mission of the united states
military will be to be prepared and
ready to fight and win war and therefore
prevent war from happening in the first
place there may be some moments when we
use our troops as peacekeepers but not
the vice president mentioned in my view
of the long term for the military i want
to make sure the equipment for our
military is the best it can possibly be
of course but we have an opportunity we
have an opportunity to use our research
and development capacities a great
technology of the united states to make
our military lighter harder to find more
lethal we have an opportunity really if
you think about it if we're smart and
i've got a strategic vision and a leader
to understand strategic planning to make
sure that we change to change the terms
of the battlefield of the future so we
can make keep the pieces a peaceful
nation and i intend to keep the peace
spending money is one thing but spending
money without a strategic plan can
oftentimes be wasted the first thing i'm
going to do is ask the secretary of
defense this fellow up a plan so we
making sure we're not spending our money
on political projects but on projects to
make sure our soldiers are well paid
well housed and have the best equipment
in the world governor bush another kind
of gun question
it'll be asked by robert lutz mr lutz
governor bush yes sir
we just like to know what is your
opposition to their baby gun handgun
bill i'm sorry i didn't hear that
we'd like to know why you objected her
brady handgun bill if you do object to
it because on a recent tv ad is so that
the national rifle association says if
you are elected that they will be
working out of your office to see i
don't think the national rifle
association ran that ad but let me just
tell you my position on guns in general
sir if you don't mind me i'm not sure
he's finished with these i'm sorry i'm
sorry that kind of bothers me you know
when i see that ad like that i want you
gonna explain that ad to the er that's
funny well i don't think i ran the ad i
think somebody doesn't want me to be
president my to run that ad it's a that
wasn't my head and i think it might have
been one of my opponents ads here's what
i believe sir i believe law-abiding
citizens ought to be allowed to protect
themselves and their families
i believe that we ought to keep guns out
of the hands of people who shouldn't
have them that's why i'm for instant
background checks at gun shows i'm for
trigger locks i think that makes sense
matter of fact we distributed free
trigger locks in the state of texas so
that people can get them and put them on
our guns to make their guns more safe i
think we ought to raise the age at which
juveniles can have a gun but i also
believe strongly that we need to enforce
laws on the books that the best way to
make sure that we keep our society safe
and secure is to hold people accountable
for for breaking the law if we catch
somebody illegally selling a gun there
needs to be a consequence if we keep it
somebody you know illegally using a gun
there needs to be a consequence
enforcement of law and the federal
government can help it's a great program
called project exile in richmond
virginia we focused federal taxpayers
money and federal prosecutors and what
after people who were illegally
illegally using guns to me that's how
you make society the safest it can be
and so yeah sometimes i agree with some
of these groups in washington and
sometimes i don't i'm a pretty
independent thinker but one thing i'm
for is a safe society and i'm for
enforcing laws on the books and that's
it's gonna happen should i earn your
confidence nice president gone well
one-one it was not one of my ads either
governor but i am familiar with the
statement and it was made by one of the
top ranking officials of that
organization let me tell you my position
i think that some common-sense gun
safety measures are certainly needed
with the flood of cheap handguns that
have sometimes been working their way
into the hands of the wrong people but
all of my proposals are focused on that
problem gun safety none of my proposals
would have any effect on hunters or
sportsmen or people who use rifles they
are they're aimed at the real problem
let's make our school safe let's make
our neighborhoods safe plus so let's
have a three day waiting period cooling
off so we can have a background check to
make sure that criminals and people who
really shouldn't have guns that don't
get them but i'd like to use my
remaining time on this exchange jim to
respond to justice to an exchange that
took place just a moment ago because a
couple of times the governor has said
that i am for a bigger government
governor i'm not and let me tell you
what the record shows for the last eight
years i have had the challenge of
running the streamlining program called
reinventing government and if there are
any federal employees in this group you
know what that means the federal
government has been reduced in size by
more than three hundred thousand people
and it's now the smallest number that we
have had since the smallest in size
since john kennedy's administration
during the the last five years
texas's government has gone up in size
federal government has gone down texas
government has gone up now my plan for
the future i see a time when we have
smaller smarter government where you
don't have to wait in line because you
can get services online cheaper better
faster we can do that
steve lucre has a question and it is for
vice president gore
lucca there you are
this is ice president gore the family
farms are disappearing and having a hard
time even in the current positive
economic environment what steps would
you or your administration take on
agriculture policy developments to
protect the family farms for this
multifunctional service they perform
we've got a bumper crop this year but
that's the good news you know what the
bad news is it follows on that the
prices are low in the last several years
the so-called freedom to farm law has in
my view been mostly offensive i want to
change many of its provisions now many
here will who are not involved in
farming don't won't follow this so just
forgive me because the two percent of
the country that is involved in farming
is important because the rest dollars
wouldn't eat except for them and and you
guys have been having a hard time and i
want to fight for you i want to change
those provisions i want to restore a
meaningful safety net and i think that
you pointed the way in your comments
because when you say there they're
multiple things accomplished by farmers
you're specifically including
conservation and protection of the
environment and yes farmers are the
first environmentalists and when they
decide not to plow a field that is
vulnerable to soil erosion that may cost
them a little money but it helps the
environment i think that we ought to
have an expanded conservation reserve
program and i think that the
environmental benefits that come from
sound management of the land ought to
represent a new way for farmers to get
some income that will enable them enable
you to make sensible choices in crop
rotation and when you leave the the land
fallow and the rest now i'll go beyond
that and say i think we need much more
focused rural economic development
programs i see a time when when the
internet-based activities are more
available in the rural areas and we're
the extra source of income that farm
families used to have from shoe
factories is replaced by an extra source
of income from from working in the
information economy so we need to do a
lot of things but we ought to start with
a better safety net coming to us two
i'd like our farmers feeding the world
we're the best were the best best
producers in the world and i want and
want the farmers feed in the world we
need to open up markets exports are down
and every time an export number goes
down it hurts the farmer i want the next
president fast-track negotiating
authority to open up markets around the
world we're the best were the most
efficient efficient farmers i don't want
to use food as a diplomatic weapon from
this point forward we shouldn't be using
food it hurts the farmers it's not the
right thing to do i'm value-added
processing we need to make more work on
value-added process you take the raw
product you produce i presume your
farmer off your farm and convert it i
think value-added processing is
important for research and development
spending research and development money
so that we can use our technological
base to figure out new uses for farm
products i'm forgetting rid of the death
tax completely getting rid of the death
tax when reason family farmers are
forced to sell early is because of the
death tax this is a bad tax the
president shouldn't have vetoed that
bill i'd say it's a tax that taxes
people twice it penalized us the family
farmer so should i be forced enough
during your vote i also understand open
up markets but i also understand that
farming is a part of our national
i'm up from a big farm state with the
second biggest state farm estate in the
country and i hear from our farmers
friends all the time
vice-presidents right by the way every
day is earth day if you own the land and
i like the i like the policies that will
encourage farmers to put set aside land
as well for conservation purposes thank
you a quick thing on the inheritance
taxes but there is a difference between
the two of you on this vice president
gore yeah yeah but i'm for a massive
reform of the estate tax or the death
and under the plan that i've proposed
80 of all family farms will be
completely exempt from the estate tax
and and
the vast majority of all family
businesses would be completely exempt
and all of the others would have sharply
reduced so 80 now the problem with
completely eliminating it goes back to
the to the wealthiest 1 the amount of
money that has to be raised in taxes
from middle-class families to make up
for completely eliminating that on the
the very wealthiest of billionaires that
would that would be an extra heavy
burden on middle-class families and so
let's do it for most all but not
completely eliminate it for the very top
what's the case for doing that
government eliminating the death tax
completely because people shouldn't be
taxed twice on their assets see they're
unfair for some or unfair for all yeah
again this is just a difference of
opinion if you're from washington you
want to pick and choose winners i don't
think that's the role of the president i
think you're gonna have tax relief
everybody benefits secondly i think
you're playing a lot of fine print
you're playing mr vice president all
due respect it is i'm not so sure 80 of
people get get the death tax i know this
100 percent will get it if i if i'm the
president that's it i just don't think
it's fair to tax people's assets twice
regardless of your status it's a
fairness issue it's an issue of
principle not politics new issue to
issue and the question will be asked by
choice climber of governor bush choice
cleveland there you go a choice i'm very
concerned about the morality of our
country now tv movies the music that our
children ours
are you know garaged with every day and
i want to know if there's anything that
can be worked out with the hollywood or
whoever to help get rid of some of this
bad language in them whatever you know
it's just bringing the country down and
our children are very important to us
and we're concerned about their
education at school we should be
concerned about their education at home
also yeah
they appreciate that question lara and i
are proud parents of teenage girls twin
daughters and i know what you're saying
government ought to stand on the side of
parents parents are teaching their
children right from wrong and the
message also oftentimes gets undermined
by the popular culture you bet there's
things the government can do we can work
with the entertainment industry to
provide family our we can have filters
on internets where public money is spent
there ought to be filters in public
libraries and filters in public schools
so if kids get on the internet they're
not gonna be pornography or violence
coming in i think we ought to have
character education in our schools i
know that doesn't directly talk about
hollywood but it does reinforce the
values you're teaching i can greatly
expand character education funding so
that public schools will teach children
values values which have stood the test
of time
there's after-school money available i
think that after-school money ought to
be available for faith-based programs
and charitable programs that exist
because somebody has heard the call to
love a neighbor like you'd like to be
loved yourself that will help reinforce
the values that parents teach at home as
well this ours is a great land and one
of the reasons why is because we're free
and so i don't support censorship but i
do believe that we ought to talk plainly
to the hollywood moguls and people who
produce this stuff and explain the
consequences i think we need to have
rating systems that are clear and i
happen to like the idea of having
technology for the tv easy for parents
to use so you can tune out these
programs that you don't want in your
house but i'm going to remind mothers
and dads the best weapon is the off on
button and paying attention to your
children and eating dinner with them and
and in and v&m sorry okay it's all my
pure elation yeah my current vice
president going i care a lot about this
it's not just movies television video
games music the internet parents now
feel like you have to compete with the
mass culture in order to raise your kids
with the values that you want them to
have tipper and i have four children and
god bless them every one of them decided
on their own to come here this evening i
don't want to embarrass our oldest
daughter she and her husband made us
grandparents almost a year and a half
ago and and and yet if she'll forgive me
when she was little she brought a record
home that had some awful lyrics in it
and and tipper hit the ceiling and that
launched a campaign to try to get the
record companies to put ratings that
warning labels for for parents and i'm
so proud of what she accomplished in
getting them on there i've been involved
myself in negotiating and in helping to
move along the negotiations with the
internet service providers to get a
parent's protection page every time 95
of the pages come up and a feature that
allows parents to automatically check
with 1-click what sites your kids have
visited lately you know some parents are
worried about those filters that you'll
have to ask your kids how to put them on
there but if you can check up on them
then who are you you that's real power
and recently the federal trade
commission pointed out that some of
these entertainment companies have
warned parents that the material is
inappropriate for children and then they
turned around behind the backs of the
parents and advertised that same adult
material directly to children that is an
outrage joe lieberman and i gave them
six months to clean up their act and if
they don't do it we're gonna ask for
tougher authority on in the hands of the
ftc on the false and deceptive
advertising i'll tell you this i want to
do something about this respect the
first amendment
but i will do something to help you
raise your kids without that garbage all
vice president gore the next question is
for you and it will be asked by steven
koosman mr koosman where are you sir
right behind me as well there we go
right next to the last yeah got it
good plan it seems that when we hear
about issues of this campaign it's
usually medicare or social security or
prescription drugs as a college
professor i hear a lot of apathy
it's amongst young people who feel that
there are no issues directed to them
yeah and they don't plan to vote yeah
how do you address that we've got to
change it i spend a good deal of time
talking to young people and in my
standard speech out there on the stump i
i usually in my speech by saying i want
to ask you for something and i want to
direct it especially to the young people
in the audience and i want to tell you
what i tell them sometimes people who
are very idealistic and have great
dreams as young people do are apt to
stay at arm's length from the political
process because they think they're good
hearts might be brittle and if they
invest their hopes and allow themselves
to believe then they're gonna be let
down and disappointed
but thank goodness we've always had
enough people who have been willing in
every generation to push past the fear
of a broken heart and become deeply
involved in forming a more perfect union
we're america and and we we believe in
our future and we know we have the
ability to shape our future now we've
got to address one of the one of the
biggest threats to our democracy and
that is the current campaign financing
system and i know they say it doesn't
rank anywhere on the polls i don't
believe i don't believe that's a fair
measure i'm telling you yeah i will make
it the i will make the mccain-feingold
campaign finance reform bill the very
first measure that i send to the
congress as president governor bush
opposes them i wish that he would
consider changing his mind on that
because i think that the special
interests have too much power and we
need to give our democracy back to the
american people let me tell you why
those issues you mentioned social
security prescription drugs the big drug
companies are against the prescription
drug proposal that i've made the the
hmos are against the patient's rights
bill the dingell norwood bill that i
support and that governor bush does not
support the big oil companies are
against the measures to get it more
energy independence and renewable fuels
they ought to have their voices heard
but they shouldn't have a big megaphone
that drowns out the american people we
need campaign finance reform and we need
to shoot straight with young and old
alike and tell them what the real
choices are and we can renew and
rekindle the american spirit and make
our future what our founders dreamed it
could be we can governor bush two
minutes tell you what i hear
a lot of people are sick and tired of
bitterness in washington dc and
therefore they don't want any part of
politics they look at washington and see
people pointing fingers and casting
blame and saying one thing and doing
another a lot of young folk saying you
know why do i want to be involved with
this mess and what i think needs to
happen in order to encourage the young
to become involved is to shoot straight
is to set aside the partisan differences
and set an agenda that will make sense
medicare i know you talked about it but
medicare is is relevant for all of us
young and old alike we better get it
right now tax reform is relevant for old
and young alike i don't think it's the
issues that turn kids off i think it's a
tone i think it's the attitude i think
it's a cynicism in washington and it
doesn't have to be that way before i
decided to run i had to resolve two
issues in my mind one could our family
endure all this business and i came to
the conclusion that our love was strong
enough to be able to do it and the other
was could an administration changed the
tone in washington dc and i believe the
answer is yes i've otherwise it wouldn't
be asking for your vote that's what
happened in texas we work together
there's a man here in this audience
named lugo berlanga he's a chairman of
the health committee he came here for a
reason to tout our record on health in
texas he's a democrat i didn't care
whether republican or democrat what i
cared about is could we work together
that's what washington dc needs and
finally sir to answer your question it
needs somebody in office he'll tell the
truth that's the best way to get people
back in the system
governor bush norma kirby has the next
question and it's for you norma curie
where are you i know i how will your
administration address diversity
inclusiveness and what role will
affirmative action play in your overall
plan i've had a record of people
bringing people from all walks of life
into my administration and my
administration is better off for it in
texas i'm gonna find people that want to
serve their country but i want a diverse
administration i think it's important
i've worked hard in the state of texas
to make sure our institutions are
reflect the state with good smart policy
policy that rejects quotas
i don't like quotas quotas tend to pit
one group of people against another
porter's are bad for america it's not
the way america is all about
but policies that that give people are
helping hand thing help themselves for
example in our state of texas i worked
with the legislature both republicans
and democrats to pass a law that said if
you come in the top 10 of your high
school class you're automatically
admitted to one of our one of our higher
institutions of higher institutions of
learning college and as a result our
universities are now more diverse
there's a smart thing to do is what i
called it i labeled it affirmative
access i think the contracting business
in government can help
not with quotas but help meet a goal of
ownership of small businesses for
example the contracts need to be smaller
the agencies need to be you know we need
to recruit and to work hard to find
people to bid on the state contracts i
think we can do that in a way that that
represents what america is all about
which is equal opportunity and and an
opportunity for people to realize their
potential so to answer your question i
guess the way to put his affirmative
access and i'll have an administration
that'll make you proud thank you nice
president gore i believe in this goal
and this effort with all my heart i
believe that our future as a nation
depends upon whether or not we can break
down these barriers that have been used
to pit group against group and and bring
our people together how do you do it
well you you establish respect for
differences you don't ignore differences
it's all too easy for somebody in the
majority and the population to say oh
we're just all all the same without an
understanding of the different life
experience that you've had that others
have had once you have that
understanding and mutual respect then we
can transcend the differences and
embrace the highest common denominator
of the american spirit i don't know what
affirmative access means i do know what
affirmative action means i know the
governor's against it and i know that
i'm for it i know what a hate crime
statute pending at the national level is
all about in the aftermath of james
byrd's death i'm for that proposed law
the governor is against it i know what
it means to have a commitment to
diversity i am part of an administration
that has the finest record on diversity
and and incidentally an excellent i mean
i think our success over the last eight
years has not been in spite of diversity
but becuase of it because we're able to
draw on the wisdom and experience from
from different parts of the society that
had been tapped in the same way before
and incidentally mel carnahan in
missouri had the finest record on
diversity of any governor in the entire
history of the state of missouri and i
want to honor that among his other
achievements here now i i just believe
that what we have to do is enforce the
civil rights laws i'm against quotas
this is with all due respect to governor
that's a red herring affirmative action
isn't quotas i'm against quotas they're
illegal they're against the american way
affirmative action means that you take
extra steps to acknowledge the history
of discrimination and injustice and
prejudice and bring all people into the
american dream because
helps everybody not just those who were
directly benefited governor what is your
are you opposed to affirmative action no
affirmative action means quotas i'm
against it if a furtive action means
what i just described what i'm for then
i'm for it you heard what i was for i
supposedly keep saying i'm against
things you heard what i was for and
that's what i support what about mr
vice president you heard what he said
he said if affirmative action means
quotas he's against it
affirmative action doesn't mean good
voters are you for it without quotas i
may not be for your version mr vice
president but i am for what i just
described to the lady what the supreme
court says is a constitutional way of
having affirmative action teams just
let's go on to another another that's a
question no i'm speaking for itself mr
vice president speaks for the fact that
there are certain rules in this that we
all agree to but evidently rules don't
mean anything the question is for you
vice president gore and lisa key will
ask it it's the key where are you there
we go sorry how will your tax proposals
affect me as a middle class 34 year old
single person with no dependents
if you make less than 60,000 a year and
you decide to invest 1,000 in a savings
account you'll get a tax credit which
means in essence that the federal
government will match your thousand
dollars with another thousand dollars if
you make less than thirty thousand
dollars a year and you put five hundred
dollars in a savings account the federal
government will match it with fifteen
hundred dollars if you make more than
sixty thousand up to a hundred you'll
still get a match but not as generous
you will get a access to lifelong
learning and education help with tuition
if you want to get a new skill or or
training if you if you want to purchase
health insurance you will get help with
that if you want to participate in some
of the dynamic changes that are going on
in in our country you will get specific
help in doing that if you are part of
the of the bottom 20 or so of wage
earners then you will get an expanded
earned income tax credit now the tax
relief that i propose is directed
specifically at middle-income
individuals and families and if you have
a if you have an elderly parent or
grandparent who needs long-term care
then you will get help with that 3,000
tax credit to help your expenses in
taking care of a loved one who needs
long-term care governor bush right let
me just say the first this business
about that kind of the entitlement he
tried to describe about savings no
matching savings here in matching
savings they're fully funded is going to
cost a whole lot of money a lot more
than we have
you're gonna get tax relief under my
plan you're not gonna be targeted in or
targeted out everybody pays tax is gonna
get tax relief if you take care of an
elderly new home you're gonna get the
personal exemption increased i think
also what you need to think about is not
the immediate but what about medicare
you get a plan that will include
prescription drugs a plan that will give
you options now i hope people understand
that medicare today is is is important
but it doesn't keep up with the new
medicines if you're a medicare person on
medicare you don't get the new new
procedures you're stuck in a time warp
in many ways so it'll be a modern
medicare system that trusts you to make
a variety of options for you you're
gonna live in a peaceful world it'll be
a world of peace because we're gonna
have a clear clear sighted foreign
policy based upon a strong military in a
mission that stands by our friends a
mission that doesn't try to be all
things to all people
judicious use of the military which will
help keep the peace you'll be in a world
hopefully that's more educated so it's
less likely you'll be harmed in your
neighborhood seeing an educated child is
one much more likely to be hopeful and
you'll be in a world in which fits into
my philosophy you know the harder work
the harder you work the more you can
keep it's the american way government
shouldn't be a heavy hand so the federal
government does t it should be a helping
hand and tax relief and proposals i just
described should be a good helping hand
governor next question is for you and
leo anderson we'll ask it mr antonelli
what you want to mic
and one of the last debates held on the
subject of capital punishment came up
and in your response to the question you
seem overly enjoy as a matter of fact
proud that texas leads to let the nation
in execution of prisoners sir that i've
miss read your response and all you're
really really proud of the fact that
texas is number one in executions no i'm
not proud of that death penalty is very
serious business leo it's uh it's an
issue that good people obviously
disagree on i take my job seriously and
i if you think i was proud of it i think
you misread me i do i i was sworn to
uphold the laws of my state during the
course of the campaign in 1994 i was
asked do you support the death penalty i
said i did if i administered fairly and
justly because i believe it saves lives
well i do i think of its administers
swiftly justly and fairly it saves lives
one of the things that happens when
you're a governor at least often times
you have to make tough decisions and you
can't let public persuasion sway you
because the jobs to enforce the law and
that's what i did sir
i've been some tough cases come across
my desk some of the hardest moments
since i've been the governor of the
state of texas is to deal with those
cases but my job is they ask two
questions sir it's a person guilty of
the crime
and the person had full access to the
courts of law i can tell you looking at
you right now
in all cases those answers were
affirmative i'm not proud of any record
i'm proud of the fact that violent crime
is down in the state of texas i'm proud
of the fact that that that we hold
people accountable but i'm not proud of
any records sir no house president gore
i support the death penalty
i think that it has to be administered
not only fairly with attention to things
like dna evidence which i think should
be used in all capital cases but also
with a very careful attention if for
example somebody confesses to the crime
and somebody's waiting on death row
there has to be alertness to to say wait
a minute have we got the wrong guy if
the wrong guy is put to death and that's
a double tragedy not only as an innocent
person than executed but the real
perpetrator of the crime has not been
held accountable for it and in some
cases may be still at large
but i support the death penalty in the
most heinous cases do both of you
believe that the death penalty actually
deters crime governor i do that's the
only reason to before i don't let me
sure i i don't think you should support
the death penalty to seek revenge i
don't think that's right i think the
reason to support the death penalty is
because it saves other people's lives as
president i think it is a deterrence i
know that's a controversial view but i
do believe it's a deterrence all right
next question is for you
vice president gore and thomas fisher
will ask it mr fisher
yes my sixth-grade class at st clare
school wanted to asks of all these
promises you guys are making it all the
pledges will you keep them when you're
in office
i am a person who keeps promises and you
know we've heard a lot about from the
governor about not much being done in
the last eight years as if the promises
that i made eight years ago have not
been kept i think the record shows
otherwise we have gone from the biggest
deficits eight years ago to the biggest
surpluses in history today instead of
high unemployment we now have the the
lowest african-american unemployment the
lowest latino unemployment ever measured
twenty-two million new jobs very low
unemployment nationally instead of
ballooning the debt and multiplying it
four times over we have seen the debt
actually begun to be paid down here are
some promises that i'll make to you now
i will balance the budget every year i
will pay down the debt every year i will
give middle-class americans tax cuts
meaningful ones and i will invest in
education health care protecting the
environment and retirement security we
both made promises in this campaign i
promise you i will keep mine let me tell
you about one of the governors he has
promised a trillion dollars out of the
social security trust fund for young
working adults to invest and save on
their own but he's promised seniors that
their social security benefits will not
be cut and he's promised the same
trillion dollars to them so this is the
reminds me of the line from the movie
show me the money which one of those
promises will you keep and which will
you break governor governor bush thank
you for your question i
i there's an old high-school debating
trick which is to answer something and
then attack your phone at the end
you asked about promises
you were promised that medicare would be
reformed and that social security be
reformed you promised the middle-class
tax cut in 1992 it didn't happen
there's too much bitterness in
washington there's too much wrangling
it's time to have a fresh start one of
the reasons i was successful as the
governor of texas is because i didn't
try to be all things to all people when
i campaigned in a race a lot of folks
didn't think i could win including by
the way my mother i said i'd do four
things tort reform education reform
welfare reform and juvenile justice
reform and i won and i had the will the
people in my state behind me and then i
brought folks together to get it done
and that's what we need i think in this
election to me that's what it's all
about i know this and there's i'm sure
your sixth-grade kids are listening to
these guys will say anything to get
elected but there's a record and that's
what i hope people look in and one of my
promises is gonna be social security
reform and you bet we need to take
trillion-dollar trillion dollars out of
that two point four trillion dollar
now remember social security revenue
exceeds expenses up until 2015 people
are going to get paid but if you're a
younger worker if you're younger you
better hope this country thinks
differently otherwise you're gonna be
faced with huge payroll taxes or reduced
benefits and you bet we're gonna take a
trillion dollars of your own money and
let's you invest it under safe
guidelines so you get a better rate of
return on the money then the paltry 2
that the federal government gets for you
today that's one of my promises but it's
gonna require people to bring both
republicans and democrats together to
get it done that's what it requires
there was a chance to get this done
there was bipartisan with bipartisan
approach but it's been rejected i'm
gonna bring them together both of you to
both of you
on this subject there are other
questions that also go to this
skepticism not necessarily about you but
all people in politics why is that
well first of all jim i'd like to i'd
like to respond to what the governor
just said because the the trillion
dollars that has been promised to young
people has also been promised to older
people and you cannot keep both promises
if you're in your mid-40s under the
governor's plan social security will be
bankrupt by the time you retire if he
takes it out of the social security
trust fund under my plan it will be its
solvency will be extended until you're a
hundred now that is the difference and
the governor may not want to answer that
question he may want to call it a high
school debating trick but let me tell
you this this election is not about
debating tricks it is about your future
the reason social security he says it
gets 2 you know it's not a bank account
it also that that just pays back money
that's invested it is also used to give
your mothers and fathers the social
security checks that they live on if you
take a trillion dollars out of that
social security trust fund how are the
checks gonna be how are you gonna keep a
faith with the seniors now let me come
let me come to record where we have to
go to the closing statements and what
could i answer that one peter one reason
people are skeptical because people
don't answer the questions they've been
the trillion dollars comes out of the
surplus so that you can invest some of
your own money there's just a difference
of opinion i want workers i have their
own assets simply your trust government
are people all right now we're gonna go
to closing statements right vice
president gore your thank you thank you
very much jim and i'll begin by
answering your questions i you're quite
your last question i believe that a lot
of people are skeptical about people in
politics today because we have seen a
time of a great challenge for our
country since the assassination of our
best leaders in the 60s since the
vietnam war since watergate and because
we need campaign finance reform i'd like
to tell you something about me i keep my
word i have kept the faith i kept the
faith with my country i volunteered for
the army i served in vietnam i kept the
faith with my family tipper and i've
been married for 30 years we have
devoted ourselves to our children and
now our nearly one and a half year old
grandson i have kept the faith with our
country nine times i have raised my hand
to take an oath to the constitution and
i have never violated that oath i have
not spent the last quarter century in
pursuit of personal wealth i have spent
the last quarter century fighting for
middle class working men and women in
the united states of america i believe
very deeply that you have to be willing
to stand up and fight no matter what
powerful forces might be on the other
side if you want somebody who is willing
to fight for you i am asking for your
support and your vote and yes your
confidence and your willingness to
believe that we can do the right thing
in america and be the better for it
we've made some progress during the last
eight years we have seen the strongest
economy in the history of the united
states lower crime rates for that for
eight years in a row highest private
but i'll make you one promise here you
ain't seen nothing yet and i will keep
that promise governor bush two minutes
well jim i want to thank you and thank
the folks here at washington university
and the vice president appreciate the
chance to have a good honest dialogue
about our differences of opinion and i
think after three debates good people
this country understand there is a
difference of opinions the difference
between big federal government and
somebody is coming from outside of
washington who will trust individuals
i've got an agenda that i want to get
done for the country this agenda that
says we're gonna reform medicare to make
sure seniors have got prescription drugs
and it gives seniors different options
in which they can choose so jenna says
we're gonna listen to the young voices
and social security and so we're going
to think differently about making sure
we have a system but also fulfill the
promise to the seniors in america
promise may will be a promise kept
should i be fortunate enough to become
your president i want to rebuild the
military to keep the peace i want to
make sure the public school system in
america fulfills its promise so that no
child not one child is left behind and
after setting priorities i want to give
some of the some of your money back
see i don't think the surplus is the
government's money i think it's the
people's money i don't think the surplus
exists because of the ingenuity and hard
work of the federal government i think
it exists because of the ingenuity and
hard work of the american people and you
ought to have some of this surplus so
you can save and dream and build i look
forward to the final weeks of this
campaign i'm asking for your vote for
those of you for me thanks for your help
for those of you for my opponent please
only vote once
but for those who've not made up their
mind i'd like to conclude by this
promise should i be forced enough to
become your president when i put my hand
on the bible i will swear to not only
uphold the laws of the land but i will
also swear to uphold the honor and the
dignity office to which i had been
elected so help me god thank you very
much a closing piece of business before
we go the debate commission wants
reaction to the three kinds of formats
used in the debates this year and you
may register an opinion at their website
you can almost on the wing and still
standing to mix my sports metaphors for
a moment it could take seven games to
solve to resolve the world series it's a
shame that we can't go on for four more
debates because they both seem to have
found their feet tonight in this debate
in the first seven questions that he
answered texas governor george w bush
invoked the people and trusting them
vice president al gore as advertised did
try to draw the line very carefully
between his experience and the record of
the last eight years and the promises of
the texas governor which he says are
fiscally unrealistic
nbc's tim russert a washington bureau
chief and moderator of meet the press is
in st louis and he has been watching
all this as well tim tommy saw emerging
philosophies tonight
clearly reinforced by the candidates
governor bush traditional republican
philosophy in effect in terms of the
size and scope of government but kept
emphasizing bipartisanship in trust
he believes leadership and truthfulness
are strongest assets on the other hand
vice president gore underscoring
traditional democratic themes health
care and education and an approach to
protecting the middle class against the
wealthier elements in society and he
tried very deliberately tom i believe to
overcome the character problem so-called
when he kept saying i've never broken
any laws i've always kept my word he
realizes he has to bring that to
centerpiece in order to defeat governor
bush i don't think either candidate
scored a knockout
both reinforce their base and what we
don't know is whether those swing
independent voters those undecided
voters or soft voters about 20 of the
electric one in five how they will
respond to these candidates and their
messages tonight will they in fact agree
with governor bush that it is the
measure of the man getting things done
that's more important than issues or
philosophy or they excited with
government with vice president gore
because they agree with him on the small
specific issues that he laid out and
that and that totality of that gives him
a better vision for the federal
tim we are gonna ask you to stay there
some of the issues that were not covered
in the course of this debate or for that
matter and the preceding two debates
there was very little discussion for
example about future relations between
the united states and china and russia
and any number of authorities as well as
lay people are looking to the future and
wondering how we're gonna get along with
those two countries one east and one
west in the 21st century a professor
tonight asked about young people being
apathetic in this election and yet there
was almost no discussion about the
digital divide or the role of technology
in our lives globalization really didn't
come up worker rights around the world
the issue of poverty the have-nots in
this country again
not much as rust both candidates aiming
squarely at senior voters and at
working-class and middle-class families
nbc's claire shipman is there as well
tonight and claire of course has been
covering the campaign a vice president
al gore claire what was the immediate
reaction from all the spinners on his
behalf well certainly they think tom
this was his best performance of the
three debates they really had three
goals tonight the gore campaign very
much wanted a tone from al gore that was
somewhere in between the first two
debates a little more aggressive than
last week's but a little softer and
warmer than the very first debate more
like the convention speech they think
they got that they also wanted him to
tangle with george w bush on the issues
especially social security and the cost
of bush's social security reform plan
which they think worded pretty well most
importantly they wanted to lay the
groundwork to get a little bit of
momentum coming out of this they know it
was their last shot to get a good push
off and they're already telling us about
gore's plans for the last three weeks
are saying that's starting monday he's
going to spend every day the beginning
of every day and if somebody's home or
at their place of work discussing real
issues with real people and then letting
the day unfold from there tom thank you
very much
claire shipman your colleague david
gregory of course is covering texas
governor george w bush david the
immediate reaction from tonight's debate
and then what are their plans for the
next three weeks well tom i thought it
was interesting this certainly very
happy with his performance governor bush
was clearly not trying to win the debate
on points he was speaking to a very
small group of voters the undecideds and
in the end he invoked what has become a
winning issue for him and an important
issue in the campaign according to our
most recent nbc news wall street journal
survey that is morality and character he
ended the debate by speaking to
undecided saying that i'll restore honor
and dignity to the white house that's
exactly how he ends every stump speech
on the campaign trail he went out of his
way to make sure that people got an
impression of gore has overbearing
somebody who broke the rules with high
school debating tricks he was trying to
say above the fray emphasizing
thematically what he'll do in the coming
weeks that he's somebody who can bring
democrats and republicans together we
can end the bipartisan bickering and get
things done
thank you very much nbc's david gregory
is the two candidates stay on stage
talking with some of the people who
question them tonight and other people
from st louis who were in attendance
will tell you we'll be right back with
continuing coverage including nbc's lisa
myers with the truth squad who was
telling the truth
and who wasn't tonight
tonight's debate is brought to you by
fidelity investments we help you invest
responsibly visit us at fidelity dot-com
i will make sure i get my piece of the
technology pie it's true some technology
stocks have been big winners but others
have declined sharply if you believe in
the opportunities presented by
technology companies let fidelity
expertise help guide you introducing two
new fidelity select portfolios designed
to help you take advantage of
opportunities in the wireless and
networking industries see what fidelity
money management excellence can do for
you to learn more about our new funds
call 1-800 476 save to sign up now and
get one hour free calling to anywhere in
the world is your internet slowing you
down get selasa t high-velocity internet
and push the play button unlike
this is velocity high velocity dsl
internet service
experience the net like never before
now and get three activation with no
annual contractor to lhasa t-dot-com
yet this year the government will spend
300 billion dollars on public education
more than three times what they spend
just 40 years ago but over the same time
ago student performance has declined in
almost every subject
which may explain why so many members of
congress send their kids to private
they have a choice isn't it time the
rest of us didn't do there is a better
we're back with what we're sorry to say
was the final debate in this campaign
three weeks from today the first tuesday
in november these two candidates will be
standing for election before the nation
they arranged this debate scheduled so
that if there were major gaffes tonight
that one or the other could recover in
the three weeks that we still have to go
but there are so many issues that still
have to be resolved and tonight's debate
at least in my eyes seem to be the best
exchange between the two of them yet
certainly a clear delineation of where
they stand on the critical issues before
this country or at least most of them
but were they telling the truth were
they factually correct let's go to nbc's
lisa myers now who's the captain of our
truth squad and she's been keeping track
of all that for us tonight lisa well tom
our crack team has been checking the
candidates facts again tonight for
mistakes exaggerations on truths with so
much at stake
both men clearly were much more careful
with the facts and figures they hurled
across the stage tonight but let's look
at some of the key issues first the
issue of spending the budget surplus
when you total up all the federal
spending he wants to do
it's the largest increase in federal
spending in years and it's not going to
be enough money is the governor right
when he says that you're proposing the
largest federal spending in years
absolutely not absolutely not on this
most experts say bush is right one
report found that gore has proposed at
least one point four trillion dollars in
new spending and called it the largest
expansion of government since lyndon
johnson and the great society now on
health care the candidates sparred over
who do most to give patients more rights
in dealing with their hmos
i brought republicans and democrats
together to do just that in the state of
texas to get a patient's bill of rights
through people be able to take their hmo
insurance company to court that's what
i've done in texas and that's the kind
of leadership style i'll bring to
washington well that's misleading the
truth is that in texas a key bill to
give patients the right to sue their hmo
became law without bush's signature now
he did sign bills giving patients other
rights bush also got one of his facts
wrong on health insurance
what he said was that in fact that the
number of uninsured americans had been
constant over the years when in fact the
number of uninsured americans declined
for the first time last year in many
years now on the issue of education gore
oversold his plan to deal with failing
schools under my plan if a school is
failing we work with the states to give
them the authority and the resources to
close down that school and reopen it
right away with a new principal a new
faculty a turnaround team of specialists
who know what they're doing
it's based on the plan of governors
jim hunt in north carolina and it works
great in fact governor hunts office says
no failing school has yet been closed in
his state so experts say it's too soon
to tell if it works so gore's plan to
rescue schools also doesn't happen right
away as he claims it takes two years so
i guess bottom line tom what we found is
no real whoppers tonight but two
candidates very selective with their
facts trying to make a case for their
own version of the truth tom thanks very
much nbc's lisa myers tonight a man who
had hoped to be on that stage tonight in
fact gave a very spirited challenge to
texas governor george w bush early in
the primary season is the senator from
arizona john mccain he joins us now from
boston tonight senator mccain your great
passion is campaign finance reform and
it was vice president gore tonight who
invoked that first and talked about it
most enthusiastically almost no word at
all for the man you're supporting texas
governor bush well i certainly hope that
governor bush will come around on that
issue he is for some reforms and i
appreciate that but you know the vice
president has an enormous credibility
problem on this issue because he and the
president president clinton to base the
institutions of government in 1996 as
they broke every law if not in letter in
spirit as they went in for as much money
as they could to reelect president
clinton and vice president bush
including renting out the lincoln
bedroom which is still going on
and a number of other things selling
seats on official trade missions so
there is a credibility problem here the
vice president has i hope to work with
the with governor bush when he's present
on this issue but safe to say that the
governor has not embraced this
enthusiastically at all no he is not i
hope he will he has supported outlawing
corporate contributions and union
contributions and i think that we can
work on the other aspects of it but the
fact is whether the president whoever he
is supports are not we're gonna have
campaign finance reform and the senate
will not proceed until we dispose of the
issue senator mccain is you know a lot
of people of both parties are saying
both these candidates are being busied
back oh i'm sorry
we'll try to take care of that that's
pretty maddening what that means is that
he's hearing either a sound or his own
voice as much as he likes to hear his
own voice it can be distracting
senator mccain as you know a lot of
critics are saying in both parties both
these guys are fiscally irresponsible
the stock market has hit the wall here
in the last week or so a lot of
corporate leaders are saying this
economy is not just slowing down it's
coming to a halt are you worried at all
that governor bush is over promising was
the size of that tax cut mm i didn't
agree with it as you know at the time of
our debates but i think it's far better
than vice president gore's proposal and
i'm more worried most of all about the
fact that congress as we speak in a
smoke-filled room with only a few
members of congress they're about to
spend the surplus we're going to spend
more money in this year than ever before
by a magnitude of some 45 or 50 billion
dollars and we are spending this surplus
that both candidates are counting on
senator mccain it's always a pleasure to
have your honor air thank you tom how's
your health fine thank you and i think
that governor bush did very well tonight
and i think these debates are very
important to the american people i'm
glad they had them thank you i think so
as well we'll see how long the trail
let's go back to st louis now nbc's tim
russert is there with the vice
presidential candidate on the democratic
ticket and that's the senator from the
state of connecticut who is still
running for that seat by the way tim
we are joe lieberman welcome how are you
what do you think
i thought the vice president was very
strong very informed didn't let the
government get away with anything
tonight governor's been confusing an
evasive tonight i think the governor
bush did not answer some of the most
important questions such as what happens
when he takes that trillion dollars he
said tonight that he would take out of
the social security trust fund two
people have become eligible for social
security the money is just not going to
be there a few times he made statements
that the vice president appropriately
called him on tonight he keeps saying
that were for bigger government and the
fact is were not we unlike he are
spending less than anybody thinks we
will have in surplus
he is overspending will take us back
down the road to deficits higher
interest rates higher unemployment where
we were eight years ago when we came in
so i thought this was a not an
impressive night for the governor and a
strong one for al gore a predictable
respond for loyal running deeply fo let
me pick up on a point that tom raised
with senator mccain we have crisis in
the middle east the stock market went
down 150 points again profit earnings
from corporations are very very mixed
people are getting very very nervous and
yet your entire economic plan is based
upon surplus projection right if they
don't happen then suddenly social
security medicare become very acute
crises are you prepared to deal with
those and how if you don't have these
projected surpluses in an economy that
could be slowing down tim not only are
we prepared to deal with that and of
course we hope it won't happen and let
me just say i could i believe that the
fundamentals in the economy are strong
the market is so dramatically higher
than it was eight years ago when we came
into power the the nation can look
forward with confidence but both parties
agree here that is about 1.8 trillion
projected in surplus for the next ten
years al gore and i take 300 billion of
that off the top and say put it in a
reserve fund in case these surpluses not
materialized george bush and dick cheney
actually spend more than a trillion
over that projected surplus so they're
the ones who are the big spenders that
are gonna take us back to deficits
higher interest rates and a dramatically
lower stock market if that happens
tomiko you have a question for senator
leave of a very quick question any
chance that you'll decide not to run for
reelection for the united states senate
simultaneously you're running for the
vice presidency especially because the
race is now so close to the control of
the senate in a word no no october's
surprise all right thanks very much
senator joe lieberman who is running the
united states senate from the state of
connecticut at the same time he's
running for vice-president and if he
wins the vice presidency a republican
governor in the state of connecticut
would then have the right to appoint a
senator and it is unlikely he would pick
someone from the democratic party so
that's where we stand now we'll be back
in just a moment we'll be talking with
some folks who were undecided tonight
going into all of this they've been
tracking all three of these debates
we'll find out whether any minds were
changed there back in a moment brought
to you in part by nbc i introducing nbc
come on
that has exclusive technology so you get
the most relevant search results music
to travel to help advise to whatever you
at nbc i.com you spend less time
searching and more time finding your
agent on the web what you want when you
want it
this mobile internet you can use it
anywhere right anywhere like traveling
traveling on business business on the
sofa really sure games music online
shopping is all coming it's coming all
the way to the sofa yes it's extremely
mobile it's four wheels of fuel-injected
two-door convertible holding a hardtop
air conditioned sedan stereophonic
pleasure for rent
that's right that's rental cars
priceline.com just log on choose the
rental car that's right for you
name your own price and drive the oligo
right what does a sound investment sound
like janice found a radio network with
big plans so janice did some
high-frequency fact-finding went out to
the stations sat down with their books
and their managers and found out the
stations were doing better than anyone
expected music to janice's ears and
proof the tuning into the details can
turn up sweet opportunities sound good
get there janice mutual funds brought to
you in part by freddie mac expanding
homeownership opportunities across
america let's go to florida now nbc's
sarah james there with some undecided
voters who have been watching all these
debates sarah well tom we've been
watching with these undecided voters
because florida is such a crucial
battleground state so tonight we brought
back eight men and women to see if this
final matchup helped them make up their
so did it let's see a show of hands
after tonight's debate lou you've made
up your mind who's it gonna be for bush
now i know you're retired military a
master sergeant in the army is that the
key issue to you that was one of the key
issues the medicare and social security
and the farmers in the school now george
for you was it a question of an issue
tonight or how the candidates conducted
themselves that was most important more
of how they conducted themselves they
didn't seem to have any respect for the
rules they they seem like they got more
personal than than anything so who are
you gonna vote for if i had to vote
tonight i'd vote for me
gore but it's a tough one that's pretty
tough suzanne i know you said that you
are undecided going in tonight the most
undecided you've ever been did that just
did the debate make up your mind well
yes and no i'm still a little bit
undecided but i liked gore in the social
security and that prescription plan if
you had to vote tonight who would you
vote for probably gore
probably gore maureen what about you
what did you think after tonight i felt
that bush stuck to the issues he tried
to give the most honest answers that he
could could and that i felt that gore
went into too many personal issues and
did not stick with a question so if you
had to vote you'd vote for bush yes
coleen what about you you were looking
forward to tonight's format because it
was gonna be questions from uncommitted
voters did it help ya somewhat it did
and i like you know a couple of
questions that were asked they were
questions that were someone didn't
prepare you know was an average person
did it forth what question in particular
strive like the one about the thing a
woman who no dependence she said well
what about me what where my tax rates
gonna be because all you've heard about
is for family and seniors you haven't
heard about any one single people what
tax forms or tax breaks were gonna get
chris you saw a different gore tonight
from last debate very similar to the
first one what you think although
similar in the fact that he kept going
after bush on certain points and and
pointing the finger but he was a little
bit more eloquent on a couple of points
that mainly health care does that mean
you'd vote for him no no no as a matter
of fact it's it's a little too late one
man runs the government i think bush can
put together a better campaign or a
better staff to to run the government
than gore can bill what about for you i
know you've been going back and forth
bush gore governor bush definitely
answered the debate and the questions
tonight like a president it definitely
has my vote all right i'd like to have a
show of hands if i can how many of you
if the election were today would vote
for bush and how many of you for gore
all right so tom are undecided voters
are looking pretty committed tonight
thanks very much nbc sarah james that
split by the way is about where it
stands now in the national polls florida
will be one of the many battleground
states i'll be back with some final
thoughts in a moment tonight's debate is
brought to you by fidelity investments
we help you invest responsibly visit us
at fidelity dot-com
i will make sure i get my piece of the
technology pie it's true
some technology stocks have been big
winners but others have declined sharply
if you believe in the opportunities
presented by technology companies let
fidelity expertise help guide you
introducing two new fidelity select
portfolios designed to help you take
advantage of opportunities in the
wireless and networking industries seal
and fidelity money management excellence
can do for you to learn more about our
new funds call
avaya communication without boundaries
it's what happens when the most robust
global network leads the richest content
to take your business anywhere on the
give me crossing the ability to leech
the capacity to change it flights
next fight next
hey mr ceo get some more seeds one
event reach the right person right away
that planet feedback we help you write a
letter to others response by the way the
green presidential candidate ralph nader
was again denied access to the debate
auditorium in st louis tonight and he
said mark my words this is the debate
commission's last four raw when i'm
finished with them they're ranking and
the political opinion polls will be
below used car dealers well we'll see
about that what we do know is that the
end of this debate tonight mark the
beginning of the final round of this
presidential campaign three weeks ago
after tonight a clear delineation
between these two candidates and where
they stand and where they want to take
this country stay tuned for your local
news msnbc will have continuing coverage
of the debate i'm tom brokaw nbc news in
new york
i trust people i don't trust the federal
government's gonna be one of the themes
you hear tonight i don't want the
federal government making decisions on
behalf of everybody
the governor has said that i am for a
bigger government governor i'm not i see
a time when we have smaller smarter
government where you don't have to wait
in line because you can get services
online to men stuck to their guns
tonight and their talking points and
make no mistake at times it was a gun
battle certainly more fierce than the
more subdued gathering last time around
again and again it came back to the two
philosophies at the center of each these
men which side the government should be
evidently we don't have that exchange
between the two but we do have our first
guest tonight brian williams with you
along with chris matthews as well we
have former defense secretary former
congressman and currently the vice
presidential nominee of the republican
dick cheney standing by to talk to us
mr secretary can you hear us looks like
you're in a noisy room